Hansel minutes.com. It's Hansel minutes,
a weekly discussion with web
developer and technologists. Scott Hanselman
hosted by Carl frankly. This
is Lawrence Ryan announcing show number
one 66. Recorded live Friday,
June 19th, 2009. Support for Hanselman it's
just provided by Tellerik rad
controls, the most comprehensive suite
of components for windows forms
and asp.net web applications. online@wwwdottelerikdotcomandby.net
developers journal the world's leading.net
developer magazine online at www
dot  dot com. In
this episode, Scott talks about
windows presentation foundation with Ian
Griffith. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman, and this is another
episode of Hansel minutes. And
I'm sitting down here in
Norway at the Norwegian developers
conference, and I've got Ian
Griffiss with me, who is
a freelance WPF consultant and
also a Pluralsight instructor and
course author. Thanks for chatting
with me today. Thanks for
having me on I'm continually
trying to understand WPF and
I, I started with my
baby smash application, which I
wrote incorrectly, and then I'm
trying to make it more
correct. And now I'm working
on another WPF project. I'm
calling shoe box scan, where
someone could basically talk to
a scanner and put a
bunch of photos from their
shoe box and then do
some work. And you just
spent the last hour with
me, kind of correcting my
mistakes and we hit an
interesting wall. And I think
that that's a nice kind
of metaphor for what I
think a lot of people
who are using WPF are
doing well. I really thought
about it in terms of
wind forms. And in terms
of when 32, you went
with me, very kindly running,
screaming against the wall until
we finally hit it. Maybe
talk to this a little
bit about what we tried
to do and what went
wrong and now what I'm
going to have to do
to go forward. So this
is A very common pattern
in WPF application developments. And
as I tend to tell
people, when I hit see
this sort of thing, I
found all the WPF apps
I've worked on a fall
and into one of two
categories. One is where I
build a separate class that
manages all the interactions stuff
that's completely separate from the
code behind and the XAML.
And then there's the applications
where I wish that's what
I'd done. And we're in
the formal one because that's
the path of least resistance,
right? You sit down in
front of the visual studio
designer and wonder why there's
amyloid. If it doesn't seem
to do very much, but
then you get used to
that and you start writing
code and you think, okay,
I've got to get a
bitmap on the screen. I'll
use this image tag that
seems to work, Oh, I
can make it do stuff.
I can resize it. I
can maybe have extra stuff
led on top of it
to represent the scans and
your example. I can drag
stuff out and everything ends
up kind of getting baked
into the view. You start
using WPS visual tree, which
is the structure that represents
what's on the screen to
hold your application state. And
it can either be what
you might think of as
a model state, the underlying
ideas that are part of
the application, or it might
be more transient stuff. That's
not really part of the
model like which things are
selected right now. Am I
in the middle of a
drag operation? Do I have
a Dawn is lit up
because this is the thing
I'm dealing with right now.
And all of these things
can live in the view,
because that seems to be
the obvious thing to do,
right? To put this into
the context of the application
so that people who are,
of course, can't see this,
cause we're on a podcast.
I'm trying to make an
application where I can scan
the entire scanner Platon, which
has a number of pictures
on it. And then I
want to drag rubber bands
around them. So I might
have five or 10 pictures
that are being scanned in
one pass. I've been holding
all of those in like
what you said, the visual
tree. I've got 10 little
small wallet, sized pictures. They're
held very nicely in the
visual tree. I figured they're
inside of a canvas and
I'll spin through them later.
And that's not a good
idea is what you're saying.
It's almost always a bad
idea in the long run,
what tends to happen and
exactly what we saw happen
just now, as we were
walking through it is you
suddenly get to a point
where things just seem to
be impossible. It's like the
complexity has exploded because you're
having to try and hold
in your head. What it
was you meant by this
particular thing in this place.
And the visual triggers like,
ah, there's a, there's a
content control there. The signifies,
this particular thing to my
app. And obviously you're trying
to write code that's embodying
relatively straightforward concepts. So we
have the idea which was,
we want to make sure
when they use a drags
and outline onto the image
that they're inside the image,
I mean, we could drag
the image all the way
off the form and often
to space. And I said,
I want to bound that
inside of this. So we
only had really two places.
There was the XAML and
there was the code behind
and that's everything we were
doing. And that was the
only interaction was just you
and I trying to get
these animals to do what
we could get it to
do. There was only code
behind. We had no other
classes And that that's a
problem for a couple of
reasons. One of which is
it makes the code really
hard to follow the 30
quite simple ideas you want
to represent. Don't look that
simple. When you come to
write the code, you end
up with all sorts of
stuff that is dealing with
either putting things into the
view or taking them back
out again, to get back
to the information you first
thought of and yeah, you
just get, and also the
other problem is you got
a lack of testability. How
on earth would you write
a unit test to say
that the user can't drag
something outside of the bounds
of the image there it's,
that's not going to be
a particularly easy thing to
do. You're probably going to
end up having to use
something like an automated test
framework with UI automation support.
It's a feed fake input
into the UI. And that's,
that's a bit of a
nightmare. That's not the right
way to go about testing
some code, which should ultimately
be no more complex than
this number is no less
than zero. This number is
no greater than that bound.
So clearly code's in the
wrong place. Once again, I
found myself writing WPF code
in a wind form, state
of mind, right? Until you
finally said, all right, we've
got to stop. It's nice
that we got it working
80%, but everything we've done
is wrong. So then you
said, we need to do
a view model and we
hear this term more and
more because we're hearing it
in the asp.net MVC world
of view model. And, and
I'm hearing it in WPF.
Maybe explain the concept of
view model versus just the
model and just the view
within the context of WPF
for our listeners. Okay. So
just to add to the
confusion, there's at least two
popular names. As this thing
goes by. Some people call
it the view model. Some
people call it the presenter.
And more generally you sometimes
hear this, this idea refer
to a separated presentation. I
think that's the term that
the prison guys use for
this exact same concept. Prison
prison is the, I think
it's technically application guidance, but
it's actually a bunch of
code that you can download
for doing competent applications in
WPF and silver lines. For
those of us who don't
speak English, composite would be
composite applications that are composed
of other. Yeah. It's particularly
aimed at teams where you've
got a lot of different
teams putting pieces into a
single application and you want
it all to work in
concert. It tries to deal
with those sorts of integration
problems. So it's not unique
to that style of app
though. The view model concept
works in pretty much any
UI. And the idea is
this, your model typically contains
things that are specific to
your domain. So whatever you're
trying to work with that,
that lives in whatever ideas
your application tries to deal
with those live in the
model. But most user interfaces
have stuff that has nothing
really to do with the
model. That's much more to
do with the interaction. Some
of the classic example is
a drawing program. You take
something like Adobe illustrator that
has the model, which is
the drawing, the shapes that
are in the drawing, but
it also, the program has
the ability to let you
select an item in the
drawing. And it lights up
with the donors and other
things you can drag around.
Things in the toolbar will
change. And that's more to
do with the structure of
the interaction. What happens when
the user starts to push
a mouse button down, what
state changes occur, because you
have state machines, things like
drag operations. If you look
at something like multitouch interfaces,
where you're dragging a bit
map around with your finger,
then you put a second
thing to down to resize
it, to do that kind
of squeeze thing, your, your
interactions are going between different
States. And you've got to
have somewhere for that state
to live. You've got to
have somewhere for the extra
information that needs to appear
on screen that during the
interactions that doesn't belong in
the underlying model, there has
to be a place for
that to live. And people
seem to default to putting
it in the view because
nothing really drives them to
put it anywhere else. And
this is the thing that
is kind of not really
understood that there has to
be a place for that
to live. And that's what
the view model is for.
It's a separate class that
is the home for those
sorts of things. In other
words, that you've mentioned a
couple of times that we
haven't defined yet as the,
as an adult learner. And
there's really a, this word
is a little overloaded because
there's the notion of an,
a Dorner in WPF, but
then there's also the general
concept of something that being
adorned. Like you made the
comment in a, about Photoshop
that I've got some item
on the screen. And when
I click on it, perhaps
there's going to have a
resize handles or it's going
to have a little lollipop
sticking out the top that
I can grab and then
rotate where I've adorned this
item. It's not part of
the model. It's not really
part of the view or
it's transiently part of the
view. The view Has to
show it, but the view
shouldn't be the thing that
knows that it's supposed to
Hence a model for the
view or view model. Yeah,
It's exactly it. Yeah. And
just to talk a little
more about the Adorno thing,
I mean, in general, what
you said is the basic
idea of an adorned, the
WPF that happens to provide
some infrastructure, to solve some
of the common problems, cause
you want your donors to
float to the top, but
you also want them to
follow around the things that
are dawning as you zoom
in and pan and rotate.
And it just provides a
little bit of infrastructure to
try and make that easier.
But it's, it's a more
broad concept than that. As
you say, most programs that
support interactive selection have something
like that. So about, about
an hour into our exercise,
working on our little scanning
application, which I'm going to
put up on OncoPLEX and
I've had a number of
other people helped me with
on, on Twitter. It's still
not quite there. I think
the, you actually said I
was basically screwed and pretty
much what am I going
to have to do to
fix this right now? You
and I ended up with,
I think about five different
functions that were all in
the code behind, and we
really got close. And the
point where you said I
was in trouble was where
I, you know, we have
our, our scan and the
scan looks great. I can
drag rubber, you know, rubber
bands or what I'm calling
rubber bands. I mean, user
scalable, rotatable, transparent rectangles that
I could say, scan this
area and this area and
this area. And then we
started dragging it around. We
had a little preview window
that was showing how this
was going to get cropped.
And then we drug it
right off of the form
and kind of off into
non-client area. And you said,
Oh, I could see the
wheels turning in your head.
And you're like, yeah, there's
constraining this, getting this to
behave correctly is going to
require you. You said rewrite.
And I'm hoping you meant
refactor this application. Yeah. I
mean, it's, it's a, it's
a, it's a restructuring. It's
not going to be a
complete rewrites. Really. It's a
question of moving the logic
around, but quite a lot
of that logic is probably
going to have to change.
And the good news is
it's going to look simple
when you're done. Cause the
problem is right now, you've
got decisions that code is
taking, which has thoroughly intermingled
with stuff the only had
to do because you were
dealing with the visual. Sure.
It is very a, that
would describe the code. You
and I wrote is very
intimate in that we are
very much poking around inside
the view, trying to bend
it to our will. Yes.
And that's absolutely what we
don't really want to do.
So this is one of
the things I think that
is holding WPF back is
that there's, it's unclear to
a lot of people, at
least from the point of
view of the tooling. I
mean, when you say file
new WPF application, there's nothing
that says, and here now
make a view model, right?
So there's no guidance there.
How, how someone supposed to
know this? I that's a
very, I don't, unfortunately I
don't have an answer to
that. Other than maybe we
could record podcasts talking about
this sort of thing and
maybe produce demo applications that
show how it's done There.
Isn't this holding WPF back.
Okay. I think, I think
it may be, although it
does sort of depend on
what kind of thing you're
building with it. I mean,
dev ten's got stuff that's
coming, that's going to make
some of the classic line
of business application type data,
binding scenarios, easy to use.
And I think, I think
actually probably in that world
carrying on working, like you
think you're a windows forms
may actually work just fine.
So long as you're building
the kind of application that
would have worked the same
way as it does in
windows box. Is this my
problem? Is this an issue
that I'm writing apps that
aren't typical apps? I mean,
I'm not writing data, binding
HR, human resources management applications,
I'm writing either baby smash
or you know, obscure a
scanner application. Am I picking
the exact wrong scenarios for
WPS? Well, no, I, this,
this is the interesting thing.
I think you're picking exactly
the kinds of scenarios that
WPF makes possible so long
as you set about it
in the right way. Okay.
This is the kind of
thing that would be really
difficult to do. And windows
forms because of the kind
of graphic stuff you require,
what you would have ended
up doing is writing your
own slim small version of
WPF. This is part of
the reason that people like
me were very enthusiastic about
WPF. Cause he looked at
it and went, wow, this
does all the sorts of
stuff. I've had a right
time and time again in
my own windows forms, Give
you that. That's a good
point. I haven't had to
do a lot of thinking
about graphics until the very
end of this scanner thing.
I mean, ultimately my image
control was handling resizing of
the image. We've dropped these
resizable rubber bands on top
of it. And they really
kind of just worked once
we got them in the
right place yet once they
were. So talk about that,
actually that's an interesting point
that the notion of the
visual tree and we had
these adorning layers on top
of an image, these rubber
band dibbles, scalable areas on
top of the image and
yeah, And we had asked
WPF to resize the image
for us, but we hadn't
managed to ask it in
such a way that it
knew that we also wanted
the Adorno's resized at the
same time, What was happening
was I'd have a scan
say of like Ian's head
shot. And then I would
resize the application. The headshot
would resize, but all my
selection rang, rectangles stayed small.
Right? And I said to
myself, gosh, isn't this the
kind of stuff WPF is
supposed to do for me.
And you, you used a
tool called Snoop. Yeah. Now
Snoop is awesome. Snoop lets
you just go and look
at the visual tree of
application while it's running. So
you can see what you've
got because you end up
the visual tree changes. You
initialize it with XAML, but
a whole bunch of stuff
can happen at runtime to
add new things. And it's
often difficult to know where
things are with relation to
each other. But with Snoop,
once you attach it to
a process or a process
for your American audience, we
can just, you can just
move the mouse pointer over
the thing you want hit
control shift, and it will
expand this tree view showing
you where you are and
how you got there. The
MFC people and the C
plus plus people. This is
spy plus plus yes for
WPF. And what was funny
is that I'd been pounding
head against the monitor for
a number of hours over
a number of weeks in
my spare time, you popped
out the right tool and
said, Oh, and within five
minutes you realized that the
thing that was doing the
resizing was, did not know
about my, my rectangles. And
you just changed the XAML,
you copied them in and
suddenly things just worked. Yeah.
And that's one of these
things where with WPF, I'm
finding that it, you know,
it just works until it
completely doesn't work. And there
was actually also an extra
gotcha there, which is probably
worth talking about very quickly,
which is we had two
elements, both of which were
sort of doing that very
polite, British English thing of
standing by a doorway and
going no after, you know,
after you, we had the
image element and the view
box, we're both offering to
be as big as they
needed to be. They're both
saying, well, I can stretch
to fill whatever space you've
got. And the Vblocks is
saying, well, I can resize
you to make you fit
with whatever space we've got.
And we actually had to
tell one of them, look,
just be this big. Do
you know how to make
the possible out of the
impossible? Well, the dotnet ninjas
at Telerik do they just
released a huge pack of
web controls, all built on
top of ESPN at Ajax,
that'll help you build impossibly
fast and interactive applications in
no time at all. They've
made the impossible possible in
desktop development. If you think
you can't have a carousel
component and wind forms, well
you can. They're windows form
suite features of super powerful
grid, view control, and 32
other crazy desktop components. That'll
give you a dazzling WPF
like features, but in wind
forms, they do the same
thing in reporting solutions with
a new design surface, like
nothing else looks just like
graph paper gives you advanced
page layout capabilities makes it
feel more like a graphic
design software than a reporting
solution. Go check them out
at  dot com and
be at.net Ninja. And thanks
for listening. So that actually
brings up an interesting point.
We should talk a little
bit about some of the
basic elements in XAML the
ones that are the most
views useful enough. I'll enumerate
what I think they are.
And I'd like to understand,
you know, if someone were
going to sit down in
an application, they should think
about the grid. The view
box Vbox is important. If
you're dealing with, with kind
of dynamically, resizable stretchy things.
If you're not, then that's
all it does. So I
would not count that as
fundamental. I would say that's
extremely useful for specifics in
architecture, then the grid then
the canvas. Yeah. The canvas
is also important. I'd rank
it below the grid, but
still important. So what else
am I missing here? I
would say items control items
is hugely hugely important and
we're not using it yet.
And we should be Okay.
Let's talk about the grid
and the canvas and then
talk about the items control
and how that would change
the structure of my application.
Okay. So the grid is
the single most important of
the layout panels and panels
are elements in the elements
that do that. They contain
multiple children and decide where
to put them that's their
job. So the grid lets
you basically carve the space
up into rows and columns
and position stuff. And it
may not sound like much,
but that turns out to
be enough to do a
huge range of different styles
of layout. Canvas is for
a different scenario where you
don't want dynamically lab. Well
that's when you want to
say exactly where something is.
So in the case of
your little rectangle things, you
want them to be in
a precise, precise location because
they use a drill in
there and you don't want
that to move just because
you know, the window change
size. So the canvas is
great for when you need
to be in control. Okay.
Now right now I'm letting
this, the grid hold all
of my little selection items.
Yes. Is that right? And,
and they, I have no
other data structures that know
about that. I don't personally
have a collection of selected
photos. Yeah. The view is
holding this for me. And
I figured that was convenient.
We want to find out
what things are, what selections
you actually have. We have
to walk through the view
to go and find all
the controls in there. So
I don't own the data.
Yeah. I have to interrogate
my view and hope that
nothing horrible has happened. Yes.
And you're saying that the
items control and then maybe
an item template would be
a more appropriate way of
doing that, which would really
split that logic, the showing
and the knowing. Yes. And
the way I tend to
think about it is in
terms of a projection, I
wasn't two minds about using
that term because there's something
of the kind of computer
science degree about it and
it may scare people off,
but it is an important
concept, but isn't it Document
view like we learned 20
years ago. It is. But
the, the relationship between those
two things is a projection.
It's taking information in one
form and converting it into
another form, which is to
say the view and it's
understanding that it is a
projection as the important thing
about that is that is
the nature of the relationship
between the document and the
view. So yes, it's the
same idea. I use the
word projection, partly because that
also gets used in things
like link yeah. Link to
SQL you project data from
the query into the target.
It's essentially the same idea.
You'll put, you're running a
transformation. And the critical thing
is you have some underlying
information and then you transform
that to get it into
the view. You sort of,
rather than having the two
beat closely intertwined to be
unpleasantly intermingled, to the extent
that they are now, the
data just is. And then
you are able to project
that onto the screen. And
that's, that's the job of
the view and items controls
are important when you're dealing
with multiple things, because they're
what, let you take any
collection and project that into
some things on the screen.
So what you're saying is
that I need to have
a data structure that is
not automatically drawn to the
screen that actually says, alright,
selected items or selected photos
or, you know, some appropriately
named thing. Yes. They might
have coordinates, they might have
rotation and they might have,
you know, size and things
like that really. And whether
or not they're selected, I
guess, even yes. And they
don't say anything about how
they are to be displayed
correctly. They just have, they're
just collections of numbers, basically
a list of structures. Yes.
And then, And what do
I do? One extra thing
I want to point out
there is that the, the
slightly tricky thing about this
idea is that the, this
thing which I would call
the view model does not
depend on the view. It
never goes and looks in
the view. It never expects
to a bunch of controls.
It's, it's, it's more passive
than that. Okay. I can
talk to it. I can
do whatever I want. That's
exactly. So that's the list
of stuff, Fire it up
in a unit test. You
don't need to have a
window there for it to
work, but although it has
no dependency on the view,
it is very specifically for
one particular view. That's a
really interesting point. We should
kind of talk about that
for just a second. It
is intimate to the view.
It is, it is for
the view. It is for
no one else, but the
view, but it has no
dependencies on the view. Exactly.
Okay. Alright. So then I've
got this list that describes
what I want to show,
but not how to do
it. Yes. And to be
a little more specific and
precise about that. It's not
saying how it should be
rendered. It is making certain
commitments about what sorts of
information will be visible. I
like that it's making commitments.
It knows it's in dotnet
it knows it's going to
be on the screen. At
some point it may make
a commitment to, as like
a, let's say a coordinate
system. Yes. Is that a
reasonable commitment? How far should
it go before it's committed
too much. That's very tricky.
An example would be like,
let's say, I'm going to
display myself as red. Do
I use, you know, brush
objects and different things that
are specific to WPF and
store those and hold those?
Or is that knowing too
much? I would say that
is right on the margins.
I certainly have done that.
And I have yet to
come across a situation where
I've regretted doing that. And
yet it makes me feel
slightly uneasy Suddenly you're not
just committing to basic slike
location, but now you're starting
to get into, You are
bringing in user interface types
or to what you're exposing
My own. Like, like what
if I was decided to,
could I hold a button?
Like if I made a
WC, now you're getting uncomfortable.
I can tell on your
face. I have done that
and I didn't enjoy it.
And that's actually the reason
I did that was to
work around a, an interesting
feature of Silverlight where it
was unable to do something
for me. I forget exactly
what, but really what price
your soul. Yeah. And actually
for me, I think the
big difference there, the reason
the button pushes me over
the edge is that the
button is an interactive user
interface entity. Arguably a brush
is not a brush is
more of a descriptive thing,
a brush. That's how you
would like something to be
painted in. And the view
still has the freedom to
decide what to do with
that brush, where to paint
it. It's a slightly different
character. A thing is a
bit, a bit too much
of an, of its own
entity Gives us a sense
of what you know, where
to stop. So I've got
this list of stuff. And
I wanna, I want to
describe exactly how to show
it. Now, in our example,
I've got a list of
selected rectangles and I want
to display them all over
this, this larger scanned image.
How do I tell in
the XAML to lay this
out appropriately? I know how
I did it in baby
smash. I used an item
template and I did some
data binding. Okay. It was
fairly inscrutable though. The data
biting syntax, I found to
be a little different. Okay.
Well, I would say in
your application, a fundamental idea
of the application part of
the, of the whole purposes
is to pick out points
and regions on the image,
right? So I think it
will make sense for your
app, for your view model
to be exposing coordinates of
some kind and possibly one
of the jobs that you
model is going to have
to do is to bridge
between your underlying domain concept
of this piece of the
photograph and deal with specific
issues like which coordinate, which
kind of dots per inch
are we dealing with? You
know, I've got a photograph
with a $400 per inch
resolution. And I know that
my view is going to
be working in WPS 96
dots per inch coordinate system.
It's probably the view model's
job to bridge that kind
of a gap. So probably
makes sense for the view
model, the view model to
be exposing numbers in WPS
coordinate system that will represent
where it is, what is
rotation angle is and how
large it is then in
the XAML you'd actually would
use a combination of an
item template and also a,
an item container style. Okay.
And this, this is just
kind of a, a technical
trick that you have to
do because the structure would
be this you'd have an
item's control bounds to your
collection of selection areas and
the photograph. So whatever that
list is, and then it's
going to generate a child
of the items control for
each thing, it finds in
that data source. And you
want to position that based
on whatever the coordinates coming
out of the view model
say, Actually, why have this
items control this? Exactly. And
that's not a job for
the view to decide. Yeah,
generally speaking, you could say
the position would be the
views responses, But in this
instance, it's not because my
model is this scanned photograph.
I want to find the
selected areas, mapped them to
this photograph. And then I
want to save off these
wallet size photographs. So this,
this is definitely the, the
domain of, of the, the
model lands through that the
view model. So you need
to make sure the position
is handled and the slightly
complicated thing, but the items
control is it generates the
child items directly into whatever
panel you tell it to.
It could be a grid,
could be a canvas in
your case, it would be
a canvas cause you need
the precise positioning. Right. But
then it, it wraps them.
It always has a kind
of a rapid site. Each
items control has a corresponding
rapid site. The list box
has a list box item.
The tree view has tree
view item and so on
because each different license control
has its own behavior for
its own generated items. Right?
Which gives you a problem.
Where do you set the
canvas.top and canvas dot left
properties that determine where the
thing appears on the canvas.
Those only work one level
up in the tree. You
have to set them on
the thing that is the
child of the canvas. You
can't set them on any
old descendant of the canvas.
So if I set the
position on something in my
item template, that's not going
to work because my item
template is actually hosted. I
see. So where I appear
is really within the context
of my parent, my immediate
parent. Yes. So if I'm
going to put all of
these rectangles, I can't tell
the rectangle go to the
left here. I have to
tell it, go to the
left within the context of
your bounding parent. Okay. Exactly.
So essentially what you need
to do is tell the
bounty parent where it's going
to be, and you can
do that. And there's a
thing called an item container
that lets you do that.
The item container style, basically
that says, I wanna be
able to set properties on
the things you're adding to
my canvas and that's where
you do it. So that
goes in one direction in
the sense that I've got
a, I've got a collection
of these things, I guess,
and it would be an
observable collection. Yep. And then
I can describe in my
styles and do some data
binding. And this will say
that if I programmatically changed
the location of these from
the, from the code behind
kind of pointing upwards towards
the screen, then they would
move. But then I've got
interactions. I'm going to go
and hook up mouse downs
and mouse moves. I want
to drag one of these
controls around how is that
going to work? I pick
up one of these selections
and I drag it from
left to right. It's what
is it? COVID is its
coordinate really going to change?
So that's going to have
to start in the view,
first of all. So you're
going to have to add
an event handler and the
view, cause that's the only
place where you can begin
to get those events and
then you'd have your view
model expose a function that
you call every time you
get a mouse down, a
mouse, up a mouse move.
Okay. So my mouse move,
event's gonna have one line
which is go over here
and tell that guy. Yes.
Okay. Which may seem kind
of annoying and pointless, but
that means you can do
exactly that same one line
of code to fake up
mouse input during unit testing.
It makes it very easy
to predict. Interesting. Okay, good.
So I'm going to be
delegating that then I can
fake mouse moves. Exactly. Test
testis. Nice. Okay. So then
what, what am I going
to do there? I'm going
to take from that mouse
event arcs, I'm going to
take the new X, Y
I'm going to poke it
back into the view model,
which will then flow naturally
back to the view automatically.
Exactly. Yeah. And assuming you're
using observable properties with the,
I notify property change stuff.
But I, I mentioned in
a talk earlier that that
observable collection was just like
the best thing within WPF.
Like that's the thing you're
going to find so useful
all the time. What is
it? That's so great about
observable collections. The really nice
thing about it is that
it means that if you've
got just a collection of
objects that are meaningful to
your application and you add
or remove or change the
order of those things, you
don't have to do anything
to make the user interface
update itself because WPF is
able to capture all those
changes. It just hooks up
the event, handler the items,
controls, know how to do
this and then go, Oh
look, you just added a
new item. I'll generate a
new child or build a
new instance of the item
template, add it to the
screen. So you just do
one thing that makes perfect
sense, add a new object
to selected items. And it
just takes care of the
rest. There's no need to
do that manual sort of
invalidate H when stuff you
used to have, There must
be a catch though. I
mean, observable collection seemed like
magic. I've never had any
threading problems with them. I'm
always adding stuff or moving
stuff from them in the
COVID and it just works.
That'll be because you'd never
tried to add an object
from the wrong thread. I
see. I'm getting lucky. Yeah.
If you, if you try
to modify an observable collection
on a worker thread, you
will get an exception that
says this kind of collection
view does not support, changes
on a thread other than
the one that created it.
It's like, well, how many
threads are there in WPF?
And where are they living?
Cause I know how this
works in wind forums. There's,
It's, it's almost identical model.
In fact, there's one thread.
It even has to be
an sta thread, the old
comm single-threaded apartment model thread,
because WPF interacts with things
like active X controls, the
clipboard, it just has to
be. And that's the thread
that all your events will
be raised on. That's the
thread that your constructors will
be called on whenever XAML
is being loaded. Basically WPF
only ever shows you things
on that threat. So WPF
is intrinsically a threat single
threaded model. If there are
other threads it's cause you
created them. I see. So
then what is the dispatcher?
Matcha is essentially the message
loop. If you're coming from
a wind 32 background, it
is the object that presents
the programmable face of the
message processing in WPS, The
actual winter that you messaged
Luke, but it is the,
or is it, is it
There's one under the covers?
It's a little more complicated
than that because WPF actually
maintains two cues. There's the
wind 32 queue, which is
an ordinary wind 32 meshes
loop. And WPF pulls messages
off that and puts them
on its own queue and
then deals with them in
its own sweet time. Partly
because it wants to be
able to reorder the, the
events as they come in.
It will prioritize certain things
above input processing, for example.
And that, by the way
is why you get the
slightly bizarre repaint handling on
resize and WPF applications. You
may have noticed you get
a little bit of blank
space appearing temporarily when you
resize a window. It's cause
it's acknowledging the resize event
before it actually really does
anything with it. And the
paints happen slightly out of,
out of sync with what's
normally there. So there is
a one 32 message queue,
but it's not actually the
main message queue and WPF,
but the D that's all
kind of implementation details. The
dispatcher tries to hide as
much of that as well.
We have, I mean, how
much of it is all
new, fresh? I mean, is
it truly the windowing system
for the future? Cause if,
if Explorer in windows seven,
isn't written in WPF and
office, isn't written WPF and
Zune, isn't written to PPF
and media center, isn't written
to DCF, then what's it
gonna take for people to
really believe that this is
the next new thing? I
mean, it's going to take
us writing office 20, 20
and WPF before people would
go, alright, now they're serious.
Look explorers written in this
thing. Well, maybe you could
at least write the developmental
and 35th. Well, we are
doing that. That's true at
visual studio 2010 is WPF.
Yeah, that's a pretty good
start. Yes I do. I
mean, there was a, there
are a couple of questions
you kind of folded that
there was the WPS credibility,
but also is WPF genuinely
new, Which I think applies
kind of as to its
credibility. I mean, some like,
I know for example, that
wind forms itself is a
managed kind of thunking layer
on top of wind 32
itself is WPF a lie
on top of wind forms
or is it It's it's,
it's, it's a lie on
top of other things. So
the employee handling is still
the same because there is
only one way to get
mouse, keyboard, stylus input from
windows and that's through the
message queue. So it has
to interact with that, but
it does not use the,
the GDI rendering system or
GDI plus it doesn't use
device contexts instead. It's a
lie built on top of
direct X. Okay. And that's
why I can get faster
if you have a better
video card. Yes. And it
also has a completely different
approach to composing all the
different pieces of the UI
onto the screen, which is
why you can do things
sort of partial transparency and
overlap all the sorts of
things that we're paying to
get right in visually interesting
applications and windows forms. So
it is a genuinely new
rendering engine. The user in
event input processing is based
on top of what was
that before, because otherwise they
couldn't have got it to
work on windows XP fundamentally.
Oh, I see. So as
for the credibility, I think
visual studio being built in
WPF is going to be
a big deal, not just
for WPS credibility, but also
for WPS own good. The
fact that developer a division
at Microsoft is, is building
their own stuff on top
of WPF means that there's
a lot of work is
going to have to be
done. They'll find problems. They
probably would not have found
otherwise, right. Making something this
big and this complicated, I
mean, in the entire, the
editor is all WPF and
the menus are all WPF
ins are going to be
written into BPF. It's really
gonna make the BPF better.
And I assume that they're
finding era, I think there
was some discussion about performance.
They're improving font rendering. All
of this is just going
to make WPF and Dutton
at four and going forward
better. Yes. I mean, it,
it really has to, and
it's interesting if you look
at what's new in WPF
on the face of it
in version four, there doesn't
seem to be a big
kind of overarching theme. And
I did a talk on
it here this week and
I felt a bit embarrassed
that I was basically talking
about 15 unrelated things. But
on the other hand, it's
kind of the sign of
it's maturing as a platform
is that it's, it's lots
of little things that kind
of need to do. Right.
I mentioned it to, and
I was like, Hey, if
there's a grid control and
then silence, but there's a
million little things. There's lots
of tiny things. Yeah. So
the text rendering there's graphics
performance improvements has better integration
with direct X and X
and a there's does the
ribbon control is better shell
integration. So you can get
ahold of the properties of
stuff on the file system.
You can find out what
items they are. You can
interact properly at last with
windows Vista and windows seven
dialogues. There's all sorts of
stuff where you probably would
go, Oh, it didn't did
it, not already do that,
but this is exactly the
sort of thing you would
expect once Microsoft starts building
real applications on top of
it. And I, I would
say that probably if you
look at it from products,
like office's point of view
that that team in Microsoft
could easily say, well, we're
not gonna do it until
develop a division has built
their own stuff on top
of it. So it has
to happen in that Chicken
and the egg situation then.
Yeah. Okay. So you were
a book I co wrote
a book with Chris, which
is known slightly annoyingly as
the cell's WPF book. Yeah,
I apologize. I, yeah. It's,
it's a problem. Yeah. I,
I wrote slightly more than
half of it. And that
book is called, that is
called Fragomen WPF. It's published
by O'Reilly it's currently the
second edition. We will be
doing a third edition for
WPF version four. And I'm
working on that later this
year. I don't have a
ship date for that. Yeah.
This is now to be
known. I want to let
all the listeners know that
this is the Griffith WTF
book and you're also a
WPF consultant and people can
find you on the web.
Yes. So I have a
blog Eng and Griffith Eng
on tap is my blog.
So that's Angie on tap.
Well, thanks. So Eng on
tap For sitting down with
me here and talk to
me about WPF. It's been
a pleasure. This has been
another episode of Hansel minutes
and I'll see you again
next week.